jul23 draft (#368)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jul-2023/index.md

+++
date = "2023-08-06T06:45:00+05:30"
title = "Progress Report July 2023"
author = "CaptV0rt3x"
coauthor = "GoldenX86"
forum = 0
+++

Hey there yuz-ers!
Welcome back to our monthly report on all the improved features, performance gains, and bug fixes we made.
Let's jump right in!

<!--more--> 

> ## Aliens and ghosts are real! And they run on Unreal Engine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Aliens and ghosts are real! And they run on Unreal Engine!
```

> The wait was long but worth it, another game in the charming Pikmin franchise is finally arriving on Earth, just in time to join the wave of UFO declarations!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The wait was long but worth it. Another game in the charming Pikmin franchise has finally arrived on Earth, just in time to join the wave of UFO reports!
```

{{< imgs
	"./pk1.png| Imagine a cross-over with Toy Story, it would explain The Claw! (Pikmin 4)"
  >}}

This time, `Pikmin 4` decided to use Unreal Engine 4, which guarantees good performance and quality on the Switch.

> This engine also guarantees headaches implementing its particular interest in sparse textures and the stability problems it introduces to NVIDIA GPU users running Vulkan, as previous Unreal Engine 4 games have demonstrated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This engine also guarantees headaches for emulating its use of sparse textures, as well guaranteeing instability for NVIDIA GPU users running Vulkan, as previous games have demonstrated.
```

> As you can expect, there’s a lot of work to do to improve compatibility on games running this particular popular engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
(move to after section)

> [byte[]](https://github.com/liamwhite) took the first blow, by finding which part of the texture cache code caused a regression {{< gh-hovercard "11093" "affecting stability" >}} strong enough to cause device losses (the driver cutting off the GPU from rendering, resulting in an emulator crash) on NVIDIA GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[byte[]](https://github.com/liamwhite) identified and fixed a regression caused by a recent change to the texture cache which severely {{< gh-hovercard "11093" "impacted stability" >}} on NVIDIA GPUs, causing constant device losses (the driver cutting off the GPU from rendering, resulting in an emulator crash).
```

{{< imgs
	"./pk2.png| Moss seems tired (Pikmin 4)"
  >}}

> [emufan](https://github.com/GPUCode) followed up, he identified that hardcoding the total number of texture buffers to `16` was causing crashes in some Unreal Engine 4 games and {{< gh-hovercard "11098" "bumped up the count" >}} to `32`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[emufan](https://github.com/GPUCode) found that hardcoding the total number of texture buffers to `16` was causing crashes in some Unreal Engine 4 games and {{< gh-hovercard "11098" "bumped up the count" >}} to `32`.
```

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Good thing this game didn't cross paths with Pikmin (Master Detective Archives: RAIN CODE)"
    "./rain1.png"
    "./rain2.png"
    >}}

> This not only has helped `Pikmin 4 but also `Master Detective Archives: RAIN CODE`, another recent release using this same engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This not only has helped `Pikmin 4` but also `Master Detective Archives: RAIN CODE`, another recent release using this same engine.
```

{{< imgs
	"./rain3.png| Yeah, good name for a train, I'll board it in Dracula Station (Master Detective Archives: RAIN CODE)"

>   >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  >}}
  
Many things have improved, but there's a lot of work remaining to improve compatibility on games running this popular game engine!
```

# Per-game configurations - Reimagined!

> If you're not a new yuz-er, it is very likely that you've seen and used per-game configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're experienced with yuzu, it is very likely that you've seen and used per-game configurations.
```

> But incase you haven't yet, per-game configurations are a way to set game specific settings without having to redo your settings for every game you start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But if you didn't know, yuzu supports per-game configurations as an easy way to set game-specific settings, without having to change your global settings for every game you start.
```

> Imagine if few games require GPU accuracy to be "HIGH" instead of "NORMAL" or if some games work best with "OpenGL" over "Vulkan", with per-game configurations you can easily override these specific settings for just those games.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the games which require GPU accuracy to be high instead of normal, or for games which work best with OpenGL over"Vulkan, per-game configurations allow you to easily override these specific settings for just those games.
```

So, what's new, you ask?

> The brains behind this feature's implementation and our trusty slice of toast, [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq/), started working towards a future where yuzu could essentially download a game-specific configuration file, that was curated by the community, and then instantly apply those settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The brains behind this feature's implementation and our trusty slice of toast, [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq/), has started working towards a future where yuzu could essentially apply a game-specific configuration file curated by the community, and then instantly apply those settings by default.
```

> Thus users obtaining the optimal settings for any game without having to tinker with the several configuration options we have today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ultimate goal is that users will be able to apply the optimal settings for any game by default, without having to tinker with the many, many configuration options we have today.
```

Sounds exciting, right? Heck yeah!

> While toast was finalizing his designs, he quickly ran into a road-block of his own design that is our current per-game configuration system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While toast was finalizing his designs, he quickly ran into a road-block of his own design: our current per-game configuration system.
```

The existing system's design made it difficult to programmatically define and override each setting in multiple places across yuzu's backend and frontend systems.

toast decided to take the challenge head-on and {{< gh-hovercard "10839" "rewrote the entire settings backend" >}} to improve it while making it programmatically easier to define and implement any setting.
Thanks to these changes, developers now only need to write out the UI text for a setting and the system will do the rest (reading, writing, representing in the UI, resetting global state).

> This also had the benefit of providing the perfect timeframe to rework several parts of the global settings UI!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also had the benefit of providing the perfect opportunity to rework several parts of the global settings UI!
```

For example, System settings now includes `Multicore CPU Emulation` support, all three possible values for `Memory Layout`, and `Limit Speed Percent`.

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"Important changes to System settings"
	"./systembug.png"
	"./systemfix.png"
>}}
&nbsp;

The Graphics section also got its fair share of changes. 
Besides reorganizing the different options, the new `ASTC Decoding Method` option now lists our 3 different alternatives for handling that pesky ASTC format, CPU, GPU, and asynchronous CPU decoding.

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"Graphics settings also got some love"
	"./gpubug.png"
	"./gpufix.png"
>}}

And more!

But enough of the global settings, toast also changed how per-game configurations are also updated, they will now show an X button on the right of each setting if they were modified over the global value, allowing to quickly revert them if needed.

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"Graphics settings also got some love"
	"./custombug.png"
	"./customfix.png"
>}}

> Keep your eyes open for follow-up changes that will build on top of this foundation!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stay tuned for follow-up changes to settings building on top of this new foundation!
```

# Graphics Changes

[Maide](https://github.com/Kelebek1) continued his efforts on improving performance through optimizations and {{< gh-hovercard "10996" "his latest changes further optimize" >}} one of his {{< gh-hovercard "10457" "earlier optimizations." >}}
While the original changes aimed to reduce memory allocations while copying data from guest to host (User's PC), the latest changes remove data copying entirely, resulting in nearly 10% performance boost in parts of `Super Mario Odyssey` like the Metro Kingdom area, and `Xenoblade Chronicles: Definitive Edition` reporting similar gains.

[byte[]'s](https://github.com/liamwhite) {{< gh-hovercard "11136" "latest fix" >}} significantly improves the slowest shader compilation in `Splatoon 3` with time taken reduced from `30 seconds` to about `4 seconds`.
A {{< gh-hovercard "10583" "recent change to our texture cache's `AccelerateDMA` logic" >}} was identified to have been causing device losses and {{< gh-hovercard "10993" "has been since been reverted." >}}

{{< imgs
	"./sp3.png| She calls it Sasha (Splatoon 3)"
  >}}

# Input Changes

> [German77](https://github.com/german77) continued his reverse engineering of the Switch NFC service and {{< gh-hovercard "11096" "improved yuzu's code accuracy" >}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[german77](https://github.com/german77) continued his reverse engineering of the Switch NFC service and {{< gh-hovercard "11096" "improved yuzu's code accuracy" >}}.
```

He also fixed a bug which caused users' mouse to stop working after some time, by avoiding an accidental division by zero.

Newcomer [SuperSamus's](https://github.com/SuperSamus) first contribution to yuzu was to {{< gh-hovercard "11050" "fix how button mapping was being handled within yuzu." >}}
With these changes, it's now possible to share the same mappings between Nintendo and non-Nintendo controllers. Thank you!

Note: This change **BREAKS** controller configurations for those using Nintendo controllers without the direct driver.

# Android Changes

[bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei/) implemented changes to {{< gh-hovercard "11017" "fix an issue where Turnip drivers would fail" >}} on certain Snapdragon devices, and added checks for broken Qualcomm 7xx drivers.

> This means any Snapdragon user should be able to run Turnip drivers now, links will be provided in the Hardware section later in this article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means any Snapdragon user should be able to run Turnip drivers now. Links are provided in the Hardware section later in this article.
```

> [t895](https://github.com/t895) {{< gh-hovercard "11067" "disabled the prompt to save user data on uninstall in yuzu." >}} This feature often caused issues when users attempted to use different APK versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[t895](https://github.com/t895) {{< gh-hovercard "11067" "disabled the prompt to save user data when uninstalling yuzu." >}} This feature often caused issues when users attempted to use different APK versions.
```

t895 also {{< gh-hovercard "11070" "added some help text messages" >}} to inform users why certain buttons were disabled on some devices but not others.

> The most common case is Mali or Xclipse users trying to install custom drivers, a feature that is only available and possible to Adreno users, at least for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common case is Mali or Xclipse users trying to install custom drivers, a feature that is only available to Adreno users, at least for now.
```

{{< imgs
	"./mali.png| Abstract art generator (Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity)"
  >}}

# Miscellaneous changes

Apart from the ones highlighted above, there have also been several smaller changes:

[FearlessTobi](https://github.com/FearlessTobi) added {{< gh-hovercard "11047" "detection for compressed and sparse NCAs within yuzu's filesystem." >}} Instead of failing silently, yuzu will now log this info and abort the parsing.

toast added a {{< gh-hovercard "11042" "new Linux build script which added the libraries required to enable `Wayland` support" >}} on our official AppImage releases.

Not ending there, toast {{< gh-hovercard "11186" "fixed a potential memory leak with the new timezone binary," >}} which happened when games tried to ask for timezone information too many times. 
This was resolved by keeping track of the generated timezone binary instead of recreating it repeatedly.

And toast also {{< gh-hovercard "11030" "bypassed a MSVC build crash on `Windows version 10 1809 LTSC` with the new timezone binary changes," >}} by temporarily disabling this for MSVC until there is a solution from Microsoft. 

> The actual reason for this crash on older Windows 10 builds is currently unknown.

Reviewer 3: The reason is known. See https://github.com/microsoft/STL/issues/3853#issuecomment-1627630752 and related links

byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "11113" "fixed a bug that caused the `Quake` homebrew from failing to launch," >}} and {{< gh-hovercard "11135" "also fixed a bug that resulted `Splatoon 3` having an endless loading screen when LAN was enabled," >}} by implementing the missing service functions.

byte[] also {{< gh-hovercard "11016" "fixed an issue within yuzu's filesystem" >}} which resulted in either corrupt save data or failing to save data.

> A bug resulting in games like `TLoZ: Breath of the Wild` and `TLoZ: Tears of the Kingdom` to crash on Linux, due to `DBus` expecting a `UTF8` string was {{< gh-hovercard "11007" "fixed." >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A previous merge caused games with non-ASCII titles to crash on Linux, due to `DBus` expecting a `UTF8` string.  This has now been {{< gh-hovercard "11007" "fixed." >}}
```

Thanks [zeltermann](https://github.com/zeltermann)!

[Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) {{< gh-hovercard "10999" "fixed a bug that broke the game installation progress bar" >}} after the recent buffer size increase, by refactoring the progress bar calculation code.

Morph also {{< gh-hovercard "11173" "fixed a bug where yuzu would crash on systems with weak CPUs running very low clock speeds" >}}, due to yuzu's strict requirements on CPU clock precision.

> German77 reduced almost 2GB of memory usage, by {{< gh-hovercard "11128" "fixing a memory leak within yuzu's discord game presence" >}} presumed to be caused by `cpp-httplib`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
german77 eliminated almost 2GB of memory usage in some circumstances by {{< gh-hovercard "11128" "fixing a memory leak within Discord presence code" >}}, presumed to be caused by `cpp-httplib`.
```

> German77 also {{< gh-hovercard "11142" "fixed a crash in yuzu's gamelist" >}} which happened when you loaded yuzu without keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
german77 also {{< gh-hovercard "11142" "fixed a crash in yuzu's gamelist" >}} which happened when you loaded yuzu without keys.
```

> Newcomer [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10) made {{< gh-hovercard "10974" "few improvements to Vulkan surface creation on macOS," >}} While [comex](https://github.com/comex) made {{< gh-hovercard "10990" "few fixes and workarounds for macOS to resolve few undefined behaviour errors." >}} Thanks to you two!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
yuzu newcomer and Citra expert [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10) made {{< gh-hovercard "10974" "a few improvements to Vulkan surface creation on macOS," >}} and [comex](https://github.com/comex) made {{< gh-hovercard "10990" "few fixes and workarounds for macOS to resolve few undefined behaviour errors." >}} Thanks to you two!
```

This doesn't mean full MoltenVK support yet, but the gap is now smaller.

## Hardware section

### NVIDIA

The currently latest driver released at the time of writing, 536.99, is stable and also seems to have improved Vulkan performance a small but measurable notch, between 3% and 7%.
Free performance is free performance.

### AMD

It's July and we have another new AMD GPU driver with yet another extension causing issues.
If you recall from our [June progress report](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jun-2023/#amd), we reported that latest AMD drivers had broken a Vulkan feature - `extendedDynamicState3ColorBlendEquation`, and we had to temporarily disable usage of it on AMD driver version `23.5.2` and above.

Fast-forward to July, and it's still broken, for some.
Giving credit where due, AMD ***did*** fix this issue with driver version `23.7.2` but only for `RDNA2` GPUs (RX 6000 series), with `GCN4`, also known as `Polaris` (RX 400 and 500 series), confirmed to still be broken.

> In light of this, and the fact that the fixed driver still reports the same Vulkan version, we {{< gh-hovercard "11182" "reverted" >}} {{< gh-hovercard "11163" "our revert" >}} of {{< gh-hovercard "10946" "our original change from June" >}} and have {{<gh-hovercard "11204" "currently disabled usage of this extension on all AMD official drivers," >}} until this is fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In light of this, and the fact that the fixed driver still reports the same Vulkan version, we {{< gh-hovercard "11182" "reverted" >}} {{< gh-hovercard "11163" "our revert" >}} of {{< gh-hovercard "10946" "our original change from June" >}} and have {{<gh-hovercard "11204" "currently disabled usage of this extension on all AMD official drivers," >}} until this is fixed and has a new version number.
```

### Turnip

Mesa never slows down its progress, and [K11MCH1's](https://github.com/K11MCH1) AdrenoTools releases are a true blessing from the fairies.

For A600 users (Snapdragon ### series), [progress is steady](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/vk.1.3.261-A6XX). 
But the [best news](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/v23.3.0-dev) are for A700 users (Snapdragon # Gen # series), which now see much improved rendering and performance on the Mesa Turnip drivers.

Some games still require the proprietary Adreno driver to be more stable or faster, but at this rate of progress, we’ll most likely see this change soon!

## Future projects

Behind the counter, there has been great progress in some key projects.
The last missing piece of `Project Y.F.C.` the `Query Cache Rewrite` was released, but we'll talk about it next time. We're sure Xenoblade and Luigi's Mansion fans will love it

> byte[] continues to improve the current file system emulation, maybe some particular games would start working soon?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
byte[] continues to improve the current file system emulation--maybe some particular games will start working soon?
```

With these changes, it's now possible to share the same mappings between Nintendo and non-Nintendo controllers. Thank you!

Note: This change **BREAKS** controller configurations for those using Nintendo controllers without the direct driver.

# Android Changes

[bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei/) implemented changes to {{< gh-hovercard "11017" "fix an issue where Turnip drivers would fail" >}} on certain Snapdragon devices, and added checks for broken Qualcomm 7xx drivers.
This means any Snapdragon user should be able to run Turnip drivers now. Links are provided in the Hardware section later in this article.

[t895](https://github.com/t895) {{< gh-hovercard "11067" "disabled yuzu from asking to save user data on uninstall," >}} which could cause issues when users attempted to use different APK versions.

t895 also {{< gh-hovercard "11070" "added some help text messages" >}} to inform users why certain buttons were disabled on some devices but not others.
The most common case is Mali or Xclipse users trying to install custom drivers, a feature that is only available to Adreno users, at least for now.

{{< imgs

> 	"./mali.png| Abstract art generator (Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity)"

Reviewer 4: It's my cheatsheet example, lol

  >}}

# Miscellaneous changes

Apart from the ones highlighted above, there have also been several smaller changes:

[FearlessTobi](https://github.com/FearlessTobi) added {{< gh-hovercard "11047" "detection for compressed and sparse NCAs within yuzu's filesystem." >}} Instead of failing silently, yuzu will now log this info and abort the parsing.

toast added a {{< gh-hovercard "11042" "new Linux build script which added the libraries required to enable `Wayland` support" >}} on our official AppImage releases.

> Not ending there, toast {{< gh-hovercard "11186" "fixed a memory leak with the new timezone data generator," >}} which happened when games tried to ask for timezone information too many times. 
> This was resolved by keeping track of the generated timezone binary instead of recreating it repeatedly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Not stopping there, toast {{< gh-hovercard "11186" "fixed a memory leak with the new timezone data generator." >}} This would happen when games tried to ask for timezone information too many times. 
This was resolved by keeping track of the generated timezone binary instead of recreating it repeatedly.
```

> And toast also {{< gh-hovercard "11030" "bypassed a MSVC build crash on `Windows version 10 1809 LTSC` with the new timezone binary changes," >}} by temporarily disabling this for MSVC until there is a solution from Microsoft. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
toast also {{< gh-hovercard "11030" "bypassed an MSVC build crash" >}}  on `Windows version 10 1809 LTSC` from the new timezone binary changes by temporarily disabling it for MSVC until there is a solution from Microsoft. 
```

The reason, for those interested, is [documented here](https://github.com/microsoft/STL/issues/3853#issuecomment-1627630752).

> byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "11113" "fixed a bug that caused `Quake` to fail to launch," >}} and {{< gh-hovercard "11135" "also fixed a bug that resulted `Splatoon 3` having an endless loading screen when LAN was enabled," >}} by implementing the missing service functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
byte[] implemented missing service functions, {{< gh-hovercard "11113" "fixing a bug that caused `Quake` to fail to launch," >}} and {{< gh-hovercard "11135" "fixed a bug that resulted in `Splatoon 3` having an endless loading screen when LAN was enabled." >}}
```

byte[] also {{< gh-hovercard "11016" "fixed an issue within yuzu's filesystem" >}} which resulted in either corrupt save data or failing to save data.

> A previous merge caused games with non-ASCII titles to crash on Linux, due to `DBus` expecting a `UTF8` string. This has now been {{< gh-hovercard "11007" "fixed." >}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A previous merge caused games with non-ASCII titles to crash on Linux due to `DBus` expecting a `UTF8` string. This has now been {{< gh-hovercard "11007" "fixed." >}}
```

Thanks [zeltermann](https://github.com/zeltermann)!

> [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) {{< gh-hovercard "10999" "fixed a bug that broke the game installation progress bar" >}} after the recent buffer size increase, by refactoring the progress bar calculation code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) {{< gh-hovercard "10999" "fixed a bug that broke the game installation progress bar" >}} after the recent buffer size increase by refactoring the progress bar calculation code.
```

> Morph also {{< gh-hovercard "11173" "fixed a bug where yuzu would crash on systems with weak CPUs running very low clock speeds" >}}, due to yuzu's strict requirements on CPU clock precision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Morph also {{< gh-hovercard "11173" "fixed a bug where yuzu would crash on systems with weak CPUs running at very low clock speeds" >}} due to yuzu's strict requirements on CPU clock precision.
```

> german77 eliminated almost 2GB of memory usage in some circumstances by {{< gh-hovercard "11128" "fixing a memory leak within Discord presence code" >}}, presumed to be caused by `cpp-httplib`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
german77 eliminated almost 2GB of memory usage in some circumstances by {{< gh-hovercard "11128" "fixing a memory leak within Discord presence code," >}} presumed to be caused by `cpp-httplib`.
```

> german77 also {{< gh-hovercard "11142" "fixed a crash in yuzu's gamelist" >}} which happened when you loaded yuzu without keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
german77 also {{< gh-hovercard "11142" "fixed a crash in yuzu's gamelist" >}} that happened when you launched yuzu without keys.
```

> yuzu newcomer and Citra expert [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10) made {{< gh-hovercard "10974" "a few improvements to Vulkan surface creation on macOS," >}} and [comex](https://github.com/comex) made {{< gh-hovercard "10990" "few fixes and workarounds for macOS to resolve few undefined behaviour errors." >}} Thanks to you two!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
yuzu newcomer and Citra expert, [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10), implemented {{< gh-hovercard "10974" "a few improvements to Vulkan surface creation on macOS." >}} [comex](https://github.com/comex) submitted {{< gh-hovercard "10990" "a few fixes and workarounds for macOS to resolve a few undefined behaviour errors." >}} Thank you both!
```

This doesn't mean full MoltenVK support yet, but the gap is now smaller.

## Hardware section

### NVIDIA

> The currently latest driver released at the time of writing, 536.99, is stable and also seems to have improved Vulkan performance a small but measurable notch, between 3% and 7%.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The latest driver released at the time of writing, 536.99, is stable and also seems to have improved Vulkan performance a small but measurable amount, between 3% and 7%.
```

Free performance is free performance.

### AMD

It's July and we have another new AMD GPU driver with yet another extension causing issues.

> If you recall from our [June progress report](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jun-2023/#amd), we reported that latest AMD drivers had broken a Vulkan feature - `extendedDynamicState3ColorBlendEquation`, and we had to temporarily disable usage of it on AMD driver version `23.5.2` and above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you recall from our [June progress report](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jun-2023/#amd), we reported that the latest AMD drivers had broken a Vulkan feature - `extendedDynamicState3ColorBlendEquation`, and we had to temporarily disable usage of it on AMD driver version `23.5.2` and above.
```

> Fast-forward to July, and it's still broken, for some.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fast-forward to July, and it's still broken for some.
```

> Giving credit where due, AMD ***did*** fix this issue with driver version `23.7.2` but only for `RDNA2` GPUs (RX 6000 series), with `GCN4`, also known as `Polaris` (RX 400 and 500 series), confirmed to still be broken.
> In light of this, and the fact that the fixed driver still reports the same Vulkan version, we {{< gh-hovercard "11182" "reverted" >}} {{< gh-hovercard "11163" "our revert" >}} of {{< gh-hovercard "10946" "our original change from June" >}} and have {{<gh-hovercard "11204" "currently disabled usage of this extension on all AMD official drivers," >}} until this is fixed and has a new version number.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Giving credit where due, AMD ***did*** fix this issue with driver version `23.7.2`, but only for `RDNA2` GPUs (RX 6000 series). `GCN4`, also known as `Polaris` (RX 400 and 500 series), are confirmed to still be broken.
In light of this, and the fact that the fixed driver still reports the same Vulkan version, we {{< gh-hovercard "11182" "reverted" >}} {{< gh-hovercard "11163" "our revert" >}} of {{< gh-hovercard "10946" "our original change from June" >}} and have {{<gh-hovercard "11204" "currently disabled usage of this extension on all AMD official drivers" >}} until this is fixed and has a new version number.
```

### Turnip

Mesa never slows down its progress, and [K11MCH1's](https://github.com/K11MCH1) AdrenoTools releases are a true blessing from the fairies.

> For A600 users (Snapdragon ### series), [progress is steady](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/vk.1.3.261-A6XX). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Adreno 600 users (Snapdragon ### series), [progress is steady](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/vk.1.3.261-A6XX). 
```

> But the [best news](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/v23.3.0-dev) are for A700 users (Snapdragon # Gen # series), which now see much improved rendering and performance on the Mesa Turnip drivers.
> 
> Some games still require the proprietary Adreno driver to be more stable or faster, but at this rate of progress, we’ll most likely see this change soon!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the [best news](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/v23.3.0-dev) is for A700 users (Snapdragon # Gen # series), which now see much improved rendering and performance on the Mesa Turnip drivers.

Some games still require the proprietary Adreno driver to be more stable or faster, but at this rate of progress, we’ll most likely see this change soon!
```

## Future projects

Behind the counter, there has been great progress in some key projects.

> The last missing piece of `Project Y.F.C.` the `Query Cache Rewrite` was released, but we'll talk about it next time. We're sure Xenoblade and Luigi's Mansion fans will love it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last missing piece of `Project Y.F.C.`, the `Query Cache Rewrite`, was released but we'll talk about it next time. We're sure Xenoblade and Luigi's Mansion fans will love it!
```

> byte[] continues to improve the current file system emulation--maybe some particular games will start working soon?
> And Maide has some interesting ideas to implement in the shader cache code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
byte[] continues to improve the current file system emulation — maybe some particular games will start working soon?
And Maide has some interesting ideas to implement in the shader cache code.
```

> That's all folks! Thank you for staying with us until the end. See ya next time!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's all folks! Thank you for reading until the end. See ya next time!
```

The brains behind this feature's implementation and our trusty slice of toast, [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq/), started working towards a future where yuzu could essentially download a game-specific configuration file, that was curated by the community, and then instantly apply those settings.
Thus users obtaining the optimal settings for any game without having to tinker with the several configuration options we have today.

Sounds exciting, right? Heck yeah!
While toast was finalizing his designs, he quickly ran into a road-block of his own design that is our current per-game configuration system.
The existing system's design made it difficult to programmatically define and override each setting in multiple places across yuzu's backend and frontend systems.

toast decided to take the challenge head-on and {{< gh-hovercard "10839" "rewrote the entire settings backend" >}} to improve it while making it programmatically easier to define and implement any setting.
Thanks to these changes, developers now only need to write out the UI text for a setting and the system will do the rest (reading, writing, representing in the UI, resetting global state).

> Note: These changes are currently for developers only with no end-user impact, but do keep your eyes open for follow-up changes that will build on top of this foundation.

Reviewer 4: We should mention this PR also included several changes to the general settings UI layout, i have a few pics to compare.

# Graphics Changes

It's July and We have another new AMD GPU driver with yet another extension broken.
If you recall from our June progress report, we reported that latest AMD drivers had broken a Vulkan extension - `extendedDynamicState3ColorBlendEquation`, and we had to temporarily disable usage of this extension on AMD driver version `23.5.2` and above.

Fast-forward to July, and it's still broken, kind of.

> Giving credit where due, AMD ***did*** fix this issue with driver version `23.7.2` but only for `RDNA2`, with at least `Polaris` confirmed to be broken.

Reviewer 4: Giving credit where due, AMD ***did*** fix this issue with driver version `23.7.2` but only for `RDNA1` and newer devices, with at least `GCN4`, also known as `Polaris`, confirmed to be still broken.

> In light of this, We {{< gh-hovercard "11182" "reverted" >}} {{< gh-hovercard "11163" "our revert" >}} to {{< gh-hovercard "10946" "our original change from June" >}} and have {{<gh-hovercard "11204" "currently disabled usage of this extension on all AMD drivers" >}}, until AMD fixes this.

Reviewer 4: In light of this, and the fact the fixed driver still informs the same Vulkan version, we {{< gh-hovercard "11182" "reverted" >}} {{< gh-hovercard "11163" "our revert" >}} to {{< gh-hovercard "10946" "our original change from June" >}} and have {{<gh-hovercard "11204" "currently disabled usage of this extension on all AMD drivers" >}}, until AMD fixes this.

[Maide](https://github.com/Kelebek1) continued his efforts on improving performance through optimizations and {{< gh-hovercard "10996" "his latest changes further optimize" >}} {{< gh-hovercard "10457" "one of his earlier optimizations" >}}.

> While the original changes aimed to reduce guest memory (Switch) allocations while copying data from guest to host (User's PC), the latest changes remove data copying entirely thereby resulting in nearly 10% performance boost in parts of "Super Mario Odyssey" like the metro area and "Xenoblade Chronicles: Definite Edition" reporting similar gains.

Reviewer 4: While the original changes aimed to reduce guest memory (Switch) allocations while copying data from guest to host (User's PC), the latest changes remove data copying entirely thereby resulting in nearly 10% performance boost in parts of `SUPER MARIO ODYSSEY` like the Metro Kingdom area, and `Xenoblade Chronicles: Definite Edition` reporting similar gains.

# Input Changes

[Narr](https://github.com/german77) continued his reverse engineering of the Switch NFC service and {{< gh-hovercard "11096" "improved yuzu's code accuracy" >}}.
He also fixed a bug which caused users' mouse to stop working after some time, by avoiding an accidental division by zero.

[SuperSamus's](https://github.com/SuperSamus) first contribution to yuzu was to fix how button mapping was being handled within yuzu.
With their changes, it's now possible to share the same mappings between Nintendo and non-Nintendo controllers.
Note: This change **BREAKS** controller configurations for those using Nintendo controllers without the direct driver.

# Android Changes

- [bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei/) fixed an issue where Turnip drivers would fail on certain devices with Snapdragon 870 and added checks for broken Qualcomm 7xx drivers. 
- [t895](https://github.com/t895) disabled yuzu from asking to save user data on uninstall, which could cause issues when users attempted to use different APK versions.
- t895 also added some help text messages to inform users why certain buttons were disabled when games were running.

> 

Reviewer 4: Please add the PRs too.

- toast bypassed a crash on `Windows 1809 LTSC` with the new timezone binary changes, by temporarily disabling this for MSVC until there is a solution from Microsoft. The actual reason for this is currently unknown.
- byte[] fixed a bug that caused the "Quake" homebrew from failing to launch, and a bug that resulted "Splatoon 3" having an endless loading screen when LAN was enabled, by implementing the missing service functions.
- byte[] also fixed an issue within yuzu's filesystem which resulted in either corrupt save data or failing to save data. 
- A bug resulting in games like "TLoZ: Breath of the Wild" and "TLoZ: Tears of the Kingdom" to crash on Linux, due to `DBus` expecting a `UTF8` string was fixed. 
- [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) fixed a bug causing the game installation progress bar to break after the recent buffer size increase, by refactoring the progress bar calculation.
- Morph also fixed a bug where yuzu would crash on systems with weaker CPUs, due to yuzu's strict requirements on CPU clock.
- Narr reduced almost 2GB of memory usage, by fixing a memory leak within yuzu's discord game presence presumed to be caused by `cpp-httplib`.

> - Narr also fixed a crash in yuzu's gamelist which happened when you loaded yuzu without keys and then tried to launch a game.

Reviewer 5: Just loaded yuzu without keys. It didn't even rendered anything at that point.

- [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10) made few improvements to Vulkan surface creation on macOS, while [comex](https://github.com/comex) made few fixes and workarounds for macOS to resolve few undefined behaviour errors. 

> 

Reviewer 4: Ditto.
